Title: It has finally arrived: SELinux System Administration
Date: 2013-09-27 15:10
Category: SELinux
Tags: administration, book, fedora, Gentoo, packt, packtpub, selinux, system
Slug: it-has-finally-arrived-selinux-system-administration

Almost everyone has it - either physical or in their heads: a list of
things you want to do or achieve before you... well, stop existing. Mine
still has numerous things on it (I should get on it, I know) but one of
the items on that list has recently been removed: write and have a book
published. And the result is a book called [SELinux System
Administration](http://www.packtpub.com/selinux-system-administration/book).

Somewhere in the second quarter of this year, [Packt
Publishing](http://www.packtpub.com/) contacted me to see if I am
interested in authoring a book about SELinux, focusing on the usage of
SELinux (you know - handling booleans, dealing with file contexts, etc.)
in a short technical book (the aim was 100 pages). Considering that I'm
almost always busy with documentation and editing (for instance, I
[joined
Gentoo](http://www.gentoo.org/news/en/gwn/20031110-newsletter.xml#doc_chap2)
as documentation translator and editor beginning of 2003 if I remember
correctly) and am busy keeping SELinux support within Gentoo on a good
level, I of course said yes to the request.

Now, 100 pages is not a lot for a topic as complex and diverse as
SELinux so was really challenging, but I do think I managed to get
everything in it while keeping it practical. The book first starts with
the fundamentals of SELinux - concepts you really need to grasp before
diving into SELinux. Then, it goes on about switching SELinux state
(disabling, permissive, granular permissive, etc.), logging, managing
SELinux users and roles, handling process domains, etc. Just take a look
at the table of contents and you'll see what I mean ;-)

Inside the book, examples are given based on Fedora (and thus also
RedHat Enterprise Linux) and Gentoo Hardened while ensuring that there
are few distribution specific sections in it, making it usable for Linux
administrators of systems with a different Linux distribution installed
to it. Take a look at the [sample
chapter](http://www.packtpub.com/sites/default/files/9781783283170_Chapter-03.pdf?utm_source=packtpub&utm_medium=free&utm_campaign=pdf)
and, if you like it, put it on your wish list and let everyone know ;-)
