Title: Lots of new challenges ahead
Date: 2014-10-19 16:01
Category: Misc
Slug: lots-of-new-challenges-ahead

I've been pretty busy lately, albeit behind the corners, which leads to
a lower activity within the free software communities that I'm active
in. Still, I'm not planning any exit, on the contrary. Lots of ideas are
just waiting for some free time to engage. So what are the challenges
that have been taking up my time?

One of them is that I recently moved. And with moving comes a lot of
work in getting the place into a good shape and getting settled. Today I
finished the last job that I wanted to finish in my appartment in a
short amount of time, so that's one thing off my TODO list.

Another one is that I started an intensive master-after-master programme
with the subject of *Enterprise Architecture*. This not only takes up
quite some ex-cathedra time, but also additional hours of studying (and
for the moment also exams). But I'm really satisfied that I can take up
this course, as I've been wandering around in the world of enterprise
architecture for some time now and want to grow even further in this
field.

But that's not all. One of my side activities has been blooming a lot,
and I recently reached the 200th server that I'm administering (although
I think this number will reduce to about 120 as I'm helping one
organization with handing over management of their 80+ systems to their
own IT staff). Together with some friends (who also have non-profit
customers' IT infrastructure management as their side-business) we're
now looking at consolidating our approach to system administration (and
engineering).

I'm also looking at investing time and resources in a start-up,
depending on the business plan and required efforts. But more
information on this later when things are more clear :-)
