Title: After SELinux System Administration, now the SELinux Cookbook
Date: 2014-09-24 20:10
Category: SELinux
Slug: after-selinux-system-administration-now-the-selinux-cookbook

Almost an entire year ago (just a few days apart) I
[announced](http://blog.siphos.be/2013/09/it-has-finally-arrived-selinux-system-administration/)
my first published book, called [SELinux System
Administration](https://www.packtpub.com/networking-and-servers/selinux-system-administration).
The book covered SELinux administration commands and focuses on Linux
administrators that need to interact with SELinux-enabled systems.

An important part of SELinux was only covered very briefly in the book:
policy development. So in the spring this year, Packt approached me and
asked if I was interested in authoring a second book for them, called
[SELinux
Cookbook](https://www.packtpub.com/networking-and-servers/selinux-cookbook).
This book focuses on policy development and tuning of SELinux to fit the
needs of the administrator or engineer, and as such is a logical
follow-up to the previous book. Of course, given my affinity with the
wonderful Gentoo Linux distribution, it is mentioned in the book (and
even the reference platform) even though the book itself is checked
against Red Hat Enterprise Linux and Fedora as well, ensuring that every
recipe in the book works on all distributions. Luckily (or perhaps not
surprisingly) the approach is quite distribution-agnostic.

Today, I got word that the [SELinux
Cookbook](https://www.packtpub.com/networking-and-servers/selinux-cookbook)
is now officially published. The book uses a recipe-based approach to
SELinux development and tuning, so it is quickly hands-on. It gives my
view on SELinux policy development while keeping the methods and
processes aligned with the upstream policy development project (the
[reference policy](https://github.com/TresysTechnology/refpolicy/wiki)).

It's been a pleasure (but also somewhat a pain, as this is done in free
time, which is scarce already) to author the book. Unlike the first
book, where I struggled a bit to keep the page count to the requested
amount, this book was not limited. Also, I think the various stages of
the book development contributed well to the final result (something
that I overlooked a bit in the first time, so I re-re-reviewed changes
over and over again this time - after the first editorial reviews, then
after the content reviews, then after the language reviews, then after
the code reviews).

You'll see me blog a bit more about the book later (as the marketing
phase is now starting) but for me, this is a major milestone which
allowed me to write down more of my SELinux knowledge and experience. I
hope it is as good a read for you as I hope it to be.
